#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{wallpaper}
\usepackage{epstopdf}
\usepackage[italic]{mathastext}	% for general symbols
\usepackage{isomath}		% for Greek letters


\tolerance=1
\emergencystretch=\maxdimen
\hyphenpenalty=10000
\hbadness=10000
\end_preamble
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language australian
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "newtxmath" "auto"
\font_default_family sfdefault
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize 12
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_author "Alwin Wang"
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks false
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks false
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize a4paper
\use_geometry true
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 2
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\boxbgcolor #cccccc
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 1in
\topmargin 1in
\rightmargin 1in
\bottommargin 1in
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Examination of the Details of 2D Vorticity Generation Around the Airfoil
 During Starting and Stopping Phases
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Alwin Wang
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

Supervised By: Hugh Blackburn
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
This project covers a numerical study of vorticity generation around a 2D
 airfoil during the starting and stopping phases.
 It will focus on a single NACA0012 airfoil of unit chord where the two-dimensio
nal Navier-Stokes equations are solved using a spectral element DNS code.
 Results for a small range of low Reynolds numbers from 1,000 to 50,000
 will be examined and the results for a zero-lift angle of attack compared
 to an angle of attack of four degrees.
 Vorticity production on the surface and the evolution of leading edge and
 trailing edge vortex shedding will be analysed.
 Fast vorticity and slow vorticity generation will be investigated by considerin
g impulsively stated and uniformly accelerated viscous flows.
 In addition, the contribution of the two vorticity mechanisms, tangential
 pressure gradients from the fluid side and acceleration of the surface
 from the wall side, will be compared.
 Analysis of the results suggest different generation mechanisms dominate
 different regions on the airfoil surface and observed pair of leading edge
 vortices and trailing edge vortex.
 Calculation of the circulation of these vortices allows the vorticity productio
n to be related to the overall life production.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset VSpace vfill
\end_inset


\begin_inset Newpage newpage
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Note
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Context for vorticity
\end_layout

\end_inset


\begin_inset Note Note
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Check referencing as per Adam's report
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Although vorticity is not a primary variable in fluid dynamics, it is an
 important variable for understanding and solving problems (Morton 1984).
 The Kutta-Joukowski Theorem (Equation 1) helps explain lift production
 by relating the lift per unit span and circulation – the flux of vorticity
 (Anderson 2011).
 Used in conjunction with Kelvin's circulation theorem (shown in Figure
 
\begin_inset Note Note
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Ref
\end_layout

\end_inset

), many fundamental textbooks relate the generation of circulation around
 an airfoil to the starting and stopping vortices at the trailing edge produced
 by large velocity gradients (Anderson 2011, Torenbeek 2009).
 Figure 
\begin_inset Note Note
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Ref
\end_layout

\end_inset

 shows these stating and stopping vortices as observed in experiments by
 Prandtl, Tietjens and Müller (1957) over 80 years ago.
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{gather}
L'=\rho_{\infty}V_{\infty}\Gamma\\
\Gamma\equiv-\ointop_{A}\boldsymbol{V}\cdot\text{d}\boldsymbol{s}=-\iintop_{S}\left(\nabla\times\boldsymbol{V}\right)\cdot\text{d}\boldsymbol{S}=-\iintop_{S}\boldsymbol{\omega}\cdot\text{d}\boldsymbol{S}
\end{gather}

\end_inset


\begin_inset Note Note
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Figure
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Note
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Additional Findings; needs reworking
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
With the increase in availability of computational power in recent decades,
 multiple numerical studies have been conducted on vorticity production
 around an airfoil.
 In addition to Prandtl's main findings, other phenomena have been discovered
 in relation to vortex production and shedding.
 Numerical studies of viscous starting flows past wedges conducted by Xu
 (2016) detailed vorticity evolution which is applicable to finite-angle
 trailing edges of airfoils.
 For low Reynolds number airfoils Lei, Feng and Can (2013) discovered laminar
 separation bubbles on the upper surface that could cause periodic primary
 and secondary vortex shedding that varied with angle of attack.
 Leading edge vortices were also observed by Vincent and Blackburn (2014)
 on airfoils during the stopping phase which questions the importance of
 vortex production on airfoil regions other than the trailing edge.
 Though there is an emphasis in current literature on vorticity generation
 at the trailing edge, this project will take a more holistic approach to
 investigating vorticity generation around the entire surface to better
 understand these phenomena.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Note
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Vorticity production
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
During the starting and stopping phases of motion the airfoil, the vorticity
 production is due to the relative acceleration of the fluid and wall.
 It is recognised that the sources of vorticity must occur at the boundary
 of the fluid regions.
 For this particular case, Morton (1984) outlines two production mechanisms
 as tangential pressure gradients from the fluid side and acceleration of
 the surface from the wall side.
 In either mechanism the vorticity is generated instantaneously and partially
 masked by viscous diffusion when there is constant generation (Morton 1984).
 These contributions were investigated by Blackburn and Henderson (1999)
 for vortex shedding of oscillating cylinders and it was noted the pressure-grad
ient generation mechanism could override the surface-acceleration generation
 mechanism and vice versa.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Note
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
This project
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This project will explore the vortex generation around an airfoil during
 acceleration and deceleration of the airfoil which has observed in earlier
 research.
 The first aspect of this project will require a literature review to appreciate
 the various phenomena already recorded and recreate them in a numerical
 simulation.
 The next aspect of the investigation will involve varying parameters such
 as the Reynolds number and calculating the strengths of various vortices
 produced around the airfoil by evaluating Equation 2.
 The last aspect of this project will analyse the contributions of the two
 vorticity generation mechanisms for various regions of the airfoil surface
 and how variables such as Reynolds number and acceleration affect the generatio
n mechanism.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Aims
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align}
\frac{\partial\boldsymbol{u}}{\partial t}+\boldsymbol{u}\cdot\nabla\boldsymbol{u} & =-\frac{1}{\rho}\nabla\rho+\frac{1}{\text{Re}}\nabla^{2}\boldsymbol{u}-\boldsymbol{a},\qquad\nabla\cdot\boldsymbol{u}=0\\
-v\boldsymbol{n}\cdot\nabla\boldsymbol{\omega} & =-\boldsymbol{n}\times\left(\nabla\boldsymbol{P}+\boldsymbol{a}\right)
\end{align}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
